"The end," said Dumbledore, looking around at them all, "of another year."
He paused, and his eyes fell upon the Hufflepuff table. Theirs had been the most subdued
table before he had gotten to his feet, and theirs were still the saddest and palest faces in
the Hall.
"There is much that I would like to say to you all tonight," said Dumbledore, "but I must first
acknowledge the loss of a very fine person, who should be sitting here," he gestured toward
the Hufflepuffs, "enjoying our feast with us. I would like you all, please, to stand, and raise
your glasses, to Cedric Diggory."
They did it, all of them; the benches scraped as everyone in the Hall stood, and raised their
goblets, and echoed, in one loud, low, rumbling voice, "Cedric Diggory."
Harry caught a glimpse of Cho through the crowd. There were tears pouring silently down
her face. He looked down at the table as they all sat down again.
"Cedric was a person who exemplified many of the qualities that distinguish Hufflepuff
house," Dumbledore continued. "He was a good and loyal friend, a hard worker, he valued 
fair play. His death has affected you all, whether you knew him well or not. I think that you
have the right, therefore, to know exactly how it came about."
Harry raised his head and stared at Dumbledore.
"Cedric Diggory was murdered by Lord Voldemort."
A panicked whisper swept the Great Hall. People were staring at Dumbledore in disbelief, in
horror. He looked perfectly calm as he watched them mutter themselves into silence.
"The Ministry of Magic," Dumbledore continued, "does not wish me to tell you this. It is
possible that some of your parents will be horrified that I have done so either because
they will not believe that Lord Voldemort has returned, or because they think I should not tell
you so, young as you are. It is my belief, however, that the truth is generally preferable to
lies, and that any attempt to pretend that Cedric died as the result of an accident, or some
sort of blunder of his own, is an insult to his memory."
Stunned and frightened, every face in the Hall was turned toward Dumbledore now. . . or
almost every face. Over at the Slytherin table, Harry saw Draco Malfoy muttering something
to Crabbe and Goyle. Harry felt a hot, sick swoop of anger in his stomach. He forced
himself to look back at Dumbledore.
"There is somebody else who must be mentioned in connection with Cedric’s death,"
Dumbledore went on. "I am talking, of course, about Harry Potter."
A kind of ripple crossed the Great Hall as a few heads turned in Harry’s direction before
flicking back to face Dumbledore.
"Harry Potter managed to escape Lord Voldemort," said Dumbledore. "He risked his own life
to return Cedric’s body to Hogwarts. He showed, in every respect, the sort of bravery that
few wizards have ever shown in facing Lord Voldemort, and for this, I honor him."
Dumbledore turned gravely to Harry and raised his goblet once more. Nearly everyone in
the Great Hall followed suit. They murmured his name, as they had murmured Cedric’s, and
drank to him. But through a gap in the standing figures, Harry saw that Malfoy, Crabbe,
Goyle, and many of the other Slytherins had remained defiantly in their seats, their goblets
untouched. Dumbledore, who after all possessed no magical eye, did not see them.
When everyone had once again resumed their seats, Dumbledore continued, "The
Triwizard Tournament’s aim was to further and promote magical understanding. In the light
of what has happened – of Lord Voldemort’s return – such ties are more important than
ever before."
Dumbledore looked from Madame Maxime and Hagrid, to Fleur Delacour and her fellow
Beauxbatons students, to Viktor Krum and the Durmstrangs at the Slytherin table. Krum,
Harry saw, looked wary, almost frightened, as though he expected to say something harsh.
"Every guest in this Hall," said Dumbledore, and his eyes lingered upon the Durmstrang
students, "will be welcomed back here at any time, should they wish to come. I say to you
all, once again – in the light of Lord Voldemort’s return, we are only as strong as we are 
united, as weak as we are divided. Lord Voldemort’s gift for spreading discord and enmity is
very great. We can fight it only by showing an equally strong bond of friendship and trust.
Differences of habit and language are nothing at all if our aims are identical and our hearts
are open.
"It is my belief – and never have I so hoped that I am mistaken – that we are all facing dark
and difficult times. Some of you in this Hall have already suffered directly at the hands of
Lord Voldemort. Many of your families have been torn asunder. A week ago, a student was
taken from our midst.
"Remember Cedric. Remember, if the time should come when you have to make a choice
between what is right and what is easy, remember what happened to a boy who was good,
and kind, and brave, because he strayed across the path of Lord Voldemort. Remember
Cedric Diggory."